# The Alphabet of NewEng

Firstly, "NewEng" is very much a placeholder-name!

Ok and now for the alphabet itself.

We will present the alphabet in various orderings, including:

* Alphabetically&#x20;
* Alphaphonemically&#x20;
* Tabulated phonemically

## The New Letters

There are 15 new letters:

Æ æ Ç ç Ð ð (or Đ đ) Þ þ Φ φ Ȝ ȝ Ʞ ʞ Թ թ (or И и) Ŋ ŋ Œ œ Ꝏ ꝏ Ȣ ȣ Ʃ ʃ Ч ч Ƕ ƕ

<table data-header-hidden><thead><tr><th width="67"></th><th width="40"></th><th width="74"></th><th width="77"></th><th width="104"></th><th></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td> </td><td> </td><td> </td><td> </td><td> </td><td> </td></tr><tr><td>Æ</td><td>æ</td><td>æʃ</td><td>aesh</td><td>/eːʃ/</td><td>Lock in pre-shift vowels e.g. aether is /ij/ not /e/.</td></tr><tr><td>Ç</td><td>ç</td><td>çē</td><td>see</td><td>/sij/</td><td>Mark c as /s/, condense ce/ci/cy. Supports some spelling “exceptions” and enables consonantal spelling.</td></tr><tr><td>Ð</td><td>đ</td><td>đē</td><td>thee</td><td>/ðij/</td><td><p>θ and ð are barely phonemically constrasting in English, but mis-voicing these can cause misinterpretation and confusion. We have to treat English as a global language, so its markings must support people learning pronunciation as per the common models.</p><p>Used to be called “eth” but I changed the name to fit the voiced/unvoiced nomenclature of fricatives (eff/vee etc).</p></td></tr><tr><td>Þ</td><td>þ</td><td>eþ</td><td>eth</td><td>/ɛθ/</td><td>Represents digraph ⟨th⟩ as /θ/. Used to be called “thorn” but we change it to match fricative nomenclature (eþ/ðē.)</td></tr><tr><td>Φ</td><td>φ</td><td>φē</td><td>phee</td><td>/fij/</td><td><p>Represents digraph ⟨ph⟩ as /f/, almost solely in Greek- rooted words.</p><p>Phone → φōn. Syphon → sȳφon.</p></td></tr><tr><td>Ʒ</td><td>ʒ</td><td>yoʒ</td><td>yogh</td><td>/joɣ/</td><td>Replaces most instances of gh &#x26; ugh as /ɸ~f~(x)/ and silence, unless phonemically distinguishing (but I think there are no instances of this). Also may replace g in ⟨gn⟩ as this represents a velaric narrowing prior to /n/.</td></tr><tr><td>Ʞ</td><td>ʞ</td><td>eʞa</td><td>eka</td><td>/ˈɛ.ka/</td><td><p>Represents digraph ⟨ch⟩ as /k/, almost solely in Greek-rooted words. Tech → teʞ.</p><p>Chosen for visual similarity to k and χ.</p></td></tr><tr><td>Թ</td><td>թ</td><td>eթe</td><td>enyey</td><td>/ˈɛɲ.jɛj/</td><td><p>Represents phoneme /ɲ/. Rarely present in English: primarily assimilative (as in ⟨ny⟩ in “canyon”) or imported (as in ⟨ñ⟩ in “señor”). Native English speakers with no awareness of palatal phones tend towards pronouncing both ⟨ny⟩ and ⟨ñ⟩ as [nj]; non-native speakers tend towards pronouncing both as [ɲ] because this phoneme exists in a broad array of languages. ⟨ny⟩ and ⟨ñ⟩ are not phonemically-contrasting in English and there is no trend towards it, thus a single letter is suitable: ⟨Թթ⟩.</p><p>Letter is based on the Nn shapes and its shape is derived from the Armenian letter T’o /tʰ/. At present (early 2024) the Unicode charset for this new orthography uses the codepoint for T’o in the keyboard layout &#x26; fonts: This is bad practice and will be rectified in the near future, before distribution of keyboard layouts and font files; the glyph will be attached to codepoints in the Private Usage sectors of Unicode.</p></td></tr><tr><td>Ŋ</td><td>ŋ</td><td>iŋa</td><td>inga</td><td>/ˈɪŋ.a/</td><td><p>⟨ng⟩ is a ridiculous and long-standing digraph in English which actually hosts a tonne of ambiguous spellings, but for some reason has never been replaced: /ŋ/, /ŋɡ/, /nʤ/ are all very common.</p><p>⟨nk⟩ is also very common, mainly producing /ŋk/.</p><p>⟨nx⟩ exists rarely, e.g. anxious /ŋʃ ~ ŋk̚ʃ/ and anxiety /ŋz/.</p></td></tr><tr><td>Œ</td><td>œ</td><td>œ́cō</td><td>oecō</td><td>/ˈy.kəw/</td><td>Lock in pre-shift vowels e.g. economic is /ij/ (/y/) not /e/. (οικος /ˈy.koʃ/)</td></tr><tr><td>Ꝏ</td><td>ꝏ</td><td>ódub</td><td>o-dub</td><td>/ˈo.dub/</td><td>Primarily represents /uː/ [uw] when spelled as ⟨oo⟩, such as too → tꝏ, food →fꝏd.</td></tr><tr><td>Ȣ</td><td>ȣ</td><td> </td><td> </td><td>dunno</td><td><p>⟨ou⟩ is an unreasonably common digraph in English, yet it represents a crazy amount of monophthongs and diphthongs. Ironically, not a single represented diphthong reflects the phonetic values of o+u. The ȣ ligature has been selected to visually represent the modern digraph in a single character, and can be diacritiqued to modify its phonetic value. Where the ⟨ou⟩ digraph’s value can be better represented with other letters, it is. (E.g. house → haŭs.)</p><p>This glyph in many fonts is unwieldy; I have modified its appearance in a few standard fonts.</p></td></tr><tr><td>Ʃ</td><td>ʃ</td><td>eʃ</td><td>esh</td><td>/ɛʃ/</td><td>Represents ⟨sh⟩ as /ʃ/.</td></tr><tr><td>Ч</td><td>ч</td><td>чē</td><td>chee</td><td>/ʧij/</td><td>Represents ⟨ch⟩ as /ʧ/. Phonetic counterpart to the voiced ⟨j⟩ /ʤ/.</td></tr><tr><td> </td><td>ʧ</td><td>ʧŭn</td><td>tion</td><td>/ʧɵn/</td><td><p>Represents the variety of ioticized alveolar–palatal assimilants present throughout English. Most likely should be reserved for the t- series.</p><p>tion ʧon / tian ʧan / tien ʧen.</p><p>Can be uzually realized from /ʧ/ to /ʃ/. Sometimes /ʧ/ prevails over /ʃ/ due to epenthetic insertion, such as after a /s/ (question) or a stressed syllable with /n/ coda (mention). It seems that distinction is not too important here. Removal of the vowel is acceptable, especially in consonantal spelling.</p><p>Maybe don’t use this.</p></td></tr><tr><td>Ƕ</td><td>ƕ</td><td>hwăr</td><td>hwair</td><td>/ʍɛːɹ/</td><td>Aspirated w, i.e. ⟨wh⟩ in current orthography. Many native speakers conflate this with ⟨w⟩.</td></tr></tbody></table>

