# New Letters

## The New Letters

There are 15 new letters:

Æ æ Ç ç Ð ð (or Đ đ) Þ þ Φ φ Ȝ ȝ Ƕ ƕ Ʞ ʞ И и (or Թ թ) Ŋ ŋ Œ œ Ꝏ ꝏ Ȣ ȣ Ʃ ʃ Ч ч&#x20;

<table data-full-width="true"><thead><tr><th width="87">Upper</th><th width="74">Lower</th><th width="87">Name</th><th width="85">Nām</th><th width="98">/nɛjm/</th><th width="590">Explanation ov purpose</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Æ</td><td>æ</td><td>aesh</td><td>æʃ</td><td>/ɪjːʃ/</td><td><ul><li>Lock in pre-shift vowels e.g. aether is /ij/, /ɪː/, /eː/; not /e/, /ɛ/. </li><li>Æ letter prevents E being read as /ɛ/.</li></ul></td></tr><tr><td>Ç</td><td>ç</td><td>say</td><td>çāa</td><td>/sij/</td><td><ul><li>Mark c as /s/, condense ce/ci/cy. Supports some spelling “exceptions” and enables consonantal spelling.</li></ul></td></tr><tr><td>Ð / Ð</td><td>ð / đ</td><td>thee</td><td>ðē</td><td>/ðij/</td><td><ul><li>Represents digraph th as ⟨ð⟩.</li><li>Used to be called “eth” but I changed the name to fit the voiced/unvoiced nomenclature of fricatives (eff/vee etc). </li><li>θ and ð are rarely phonemically constrasting in English, but mis-voicing these can cause misinterpretation and confusion. We have to treat English as a global language, so its markings must support people learning pronunciation as per the common models. </li></ul></td></tr><tr><td>Þ</td><td>þ</td><td>eth</td><td>eþ</td><td>/ɛθ/</td><td><ul><li>Represents digraph ⟨th⟩ as /θ/. </li><li>Used to be called “thorn” but we change it to match fricative nomenclature (eþ/ðē.)</li></ul></td></tr><tr><td>Φ</td><td>φ</td><td>phee</td><td>φē</td><td>/fij/</td><td><p>Represents digraph ⟨ph⟩ as /f/, almost solely in Greek- rooted words.</p><p>Phone → φōn. Syphon → sȳφon.</p></td></tr><tr><td>Ȝ</td><td>ȝ</td><td>yogh</td><td>yoȝ</td><td>/joɣ/</td><td>Replaces most instances of gh &#x26; ugh as /ɸ~f~(x)/ and silence, unless phonemically distinguishing (but I think there are no instances of this). Also may replace g in ⟨gn⟩→⟨ȝn⟩ as this represents a velaric narrowing prior to /n/.</td></tr><tr><td>Ʞ</td><td>ʞ</td><td>echo</td><td>eʞō</td><td>/ˈɛ.kəw/</td><td><p>Represents digraph ⟨ch⟩ as /k/, almost solely in Greek-rooted words. Tech → teʞ.</p><p>Chosen for visual similarity to k and χ.</p></td></tr><tr><td>И / Թ</td><td>и / թ</td><td>enyey</td><td>eиe</td><td>/ˈɛɲ.jɛj/</td><td><ul><li>Represents phoneme /ɲ/. Rarely present in English: primarily assimilative (as in ⟨ny⟩ in “canyon”) or imported (as in ⟨ñ⟩ in “señor”). </li><li>Native English speakers with no awareness of palatal phones tend towards pronouncing both ⟨ny⟩ and ⟨ñ⟩ as [nj]; non-native speakers tend towards pronouncing both as [ɲ] because this phoneme exists in a broad array of languages. </li><li>⟨ny⟩ and ⟨ñ⟩ are not phonemically-contrasting in English and there is no trend towards it, thus a single letter is suitable: ⟨Ии⟩ (or ⟨Թթ⟩).</li><li>Letter is based on the Nn shapes and the shape of the first choice was derived from the Armenian letter T’o /tʰ/. This glyph does not fit Latinate glyphset styles so it is likely that the Cyrillic И will be used instead. The only problem with this is its identicality with N, rendering issues for dyslexic readers and new learners: most letters in English are distinct from one another (with the wild exception of dbqp). </li></ul></td></tr><tr><td>Ŋ</td><td>ŋ</td><td>inga</td><td>iŋa</td><td>/ˈɪŋ.a/</td><td><p>⟨ng⟩ is a ridiculous and long-standing digraph in English which actually hosts a tonne of ambiguous spellings, but for some reason has never been replaced: /ŋ/, /ŋɡ/, /nʤ/ are all very common.</p><p>⟨nk⟩ is also very common, mainly producing /ŋk/.</p><p>⟨nx⟩ exists rarely, e.g. anxious /ŋʃ ~ ŋk̚ʃ/ and anxiety /ŋz/.</p></td></tr><tr><td>Œ</td><td>œ</td><td>oecō</td><td>œ́cō</td><td>/ˈy.kəw/</td><td><ul><li>Lock in pre-shift vowels e.g. economic is /ij/ (/y/) not /e/. (οικος /ˈy.koʃ/ </li><li>Œ prevents E being read as /ɛ/. </li></ul></td></tr><tr><td>Ꝏ</td><td>ꝏ</td><td>o-dub, oowa</td><td>ódub, ꝏ́wa</td><td>/ˈo.dub/</td><td><ul><li>Primarily represents /uː/ [uw] when spelled as ⟨oo⟩, such as too → tꝏ, food →fꝏd.</li></ul></td></tr><tr><td>Ȣ</td><td>ȣ</td><td>ouáw</td><td>ȣau</td><td>dunno</td><td><ul><li>⟨ou⟩ is an unreasonably common digraph in English, representing a crazy amount of both monophthongs and diphthongs. Ironically, not a single represented diphthong reflects the phonetic values of o+u. </li><li>The ȣ ligature has been selected to visually represent the modern digraph in a single character, and can be diacritiqued to modify its phonetic value. Where the ⟨ou⟩ digraph’s phonetic value can be better represented with other letters, it is. (E.g. house → haŭs.)</li><li>This glyph in many fonts is unwieldy and overheight; I have modified its appearance in a few standard fonts to be the same height as other vowels.</li></ul></td></tr><tr><td>Ʃ</td><td>ʃ</td><td>esh</td><td>eʃ</td><td>/ɛʃ/</td><td>Represents ⟨sh⟩ as /ʃ/.</td></tr><tr><td>Ч</td><td>ч</td><td>chee</td><td>чē</td><td>/ʧij/</td><td>Represents ⟨ch⟩ as /ʧ/. Phonetic counterpart to the voiced ⟨j⟩ /ʤ/.</td></tr><tr><td> </td><td>ʧ</td><td>tion</td><td>ʧŭn</td><td>/ʧɵn/</td><td><p>Represents the variety of ioticized alveolar–palatal assimilants present throughout English. Most likely should be reserved for the t- series.</p><p>tion ʧon / tian ʧan / tien ʧen.</p><p>Can be uzually realized from /ʧ/ to /ʃ/. Sometimes /ʧ/ prevails over /ʃ/ due to epenthetic insertion, such as after a /s/ (question) or a stressed syllable with /n/ coda (mention). It seems that distinction is not too important here. Removal of the vowel is acceptable, especially in consonantal spelling.</p><p>Maybe don’t use this.</p></td></tr><tr><td>Ƕ</td><td>ƕ</td><td>hwair</td><td>hwăr</td><td>/ʍɛːɹ/</td><td>Aspirated w, i.e. ⟨wh⟩ in current orthography. Many native speakers conflate this with ⟨w⟩.</td></tr></tbody></table>

